यत्नेषु सर्वेष्वपि नावकेशी केशी स भोजेशितुरिष्टबन्धु: ।
त्वां सिन्धुजावाप्य इतीव मत्वा सम्प्राप्तवान् सिन्धुजवाजिरूप: ॥१॥
यत्नेषु	in (even all his) attempts
सर्वेषु-अपि	all even
न-अवकेशी	not unsuccessful
केशी स	that Keshi
भोज-ईशितु:-	of the Bhoja king (Kansa's)
इष्ट-बन्धु:	a close friend
त्वाम्	Thee
सिन्धुजा-अवाप्य	by the ocean born Laxmi attainable
इति-इव मत्वा	thus as if thinking
सम्प्राप्तवान्	approached (Thee)
सिन्धुज-	(as) born of the Sindhu land
वाजि-रूप:	in horse form
A close friend of the Bhoja king Kansa, Keshi was never unsuccessful in any of his attempts. He took the form of a horse from the land of Sindhu, thinking that Thou were easily accessible to those born off Sindhu (ocean) as Thou are to Laxmi Devi.
गन्धर्वतामेष गतोऽपि रूक्षैर्नादै: समुद्वेजितसर्वलोक: ।
भवद्विलोकावधि गोपवाटीं प्रमर्द्य पाप: पुनरापतत्त्वाम् ॥२॥
गन्धर्वताम्-	(though) the form of a Gandharva (celestial singer)
एष गत:-अपि	this (wicked one) assuming even
रूक्षै:-नादै:	by fierce noises (voices)
समुद्वेजित-सर्व-लोक:	frightening all the worlds
भवत्-विलोक-अवधि	Thee sighting until
गोपवाटीं प्रमर्द्य	Gokula destructing
पाप:	the wicked one
पुन:-आपतत्-त्वाम्	then attacked Thee
This wicked Asura, even though he had assumed the form of a Gandharva frightened all the worlds with his fierce voices. Until he set sight on Thee, the evil one destructed Gokula and then rushed to attack Thee.
तार्क्ष्यार्पिताङ्घ्रेस्तव तार्क्ष्य एष चिक्षेप वक्षोभुवि नाम पादम् ।
भृगो: पदाघातकथां निशम्य स्वेनापि शक्यं तदितीव मोहात् ॥३॥
तार्क्ष्य-अर्पित-	on Garuda placed
अङ्घ्रे:-तव	feet of Thee
तार्क्ष्य एष चिक्षेप	horse this, threw (kicked)
वक्षोभुवि	on the chest area
नाम पादम्	indeed his foot
भृगो: पद-आघात-	of (sage) Bhrigu, with feet hitting
कथां निशम्य	story having heard
स्वेन-अपि	by himself also
शक्यं तत्-	could be done that
इति-इव मोहात्	thus as if deludedly
Thou, whose feet are placed on Garuda, Thy vehicle, was kicked on the chest by this horse demon by his foot. Perhaps he had heard the story of sage Bhrigu having hit Thee with the foot, he deludedly thought that he too could do so.
प्रवञ्चयन्नस्य खुराञ्चलं द्रागमुञ्च चिक्षेपिथ दूरदूरम्
सम्मूर्च्छितोऽपि ह्यतिमूर्च्छितेन क्रोधोष्मणा खादितुमाद्रुतस्त्वाम् ॥४॥
प्रवञ्चयन्-अस्य	dodging his
खुराञ्चलं	raised hoofs
द्राक्-अमुं-च	quickly,and him
चिक्षेपिथ	(Thou) flung
दूर-दूरम्	far far away
सम्मूर्च्छित:-अपि	fainting also
हि-अतिमूर्च्छितेन	indeed in much great
क्रोध-उष्मणा	rage burning
खादितुम्-अद्रुत:-	to consume (Thee) rushed
त्वाम्	Thee
Dodging his raised hoofs Thou quickly caught him and flung him far far away. Though he fainted for sometime, with an increased rage as though set afire, he rushed to consume Thee.
त्वं वाहदण्डे कृतधीश्च वाहादण्डं न्यधास्तस्य मुखे तदानीम् ।
तद् वृद्धिरुद्धश्वसनो गतासु: सप्तीभवन्नप्ययमैक्यमागात् ॥५॥
त्वं	Thou
वाह-दण्डे	the horse punishing
कृतधी:-च	and deciding
वाहा-दण्डं	(Thy) arm, club (like)
न्यधा:-तस्य	placed into his
मुखे तदानीम्	mouth at that time
तद्-वृद्धि-	(by) its increasing (in size)
रुद्ध-श्वसन:	(by) choking of breath
गतासु:	(he) having died
सप्तीभवन्-अपि-	in a horse form though
अयम्-	this (Asura)
ऐक्यम्-आगात्	oneness (with Thee) attained
Thou decided to punish the horse, and placed Thy strong club like arm into his mouth. At that time the arm increased in size and choked the horse to death. Even though the Asura was in the form of a horse, he attained oneness with Thee.
आलम्भमात्रेण पशो: सुराणां प्रसादके नूत्न इवाश्वमेधे ।
कृते त्वया हर्षवशात् सुरेन्द्रास्त्वां तुष्टुवु: केशवनामधेयम् ॥६॥
आलम्भ-	by killing
मात्रेण पशो:	merely, of the animal
सुराणाम् प्रसादके	to the god's pleasure (joy)
नूत्न इव-	new as if
अश्वमेधे	in the Ashvamedha sacrifice
कृते त्वया	done by Thee
हर्षवशात्	inspired by joy
सुरेन्द्रा:-त्वां	the gods Thee
तुष्टुवु:	hailed
केशव-नाम-धेयम्	Keshava name giving (to Thee)
Merely by the killing of the animal the gods were full of joy. This was as if it were a new Ashvamedha sacrifice done by Thee. Delighted, the gods hailed Thee giving Thee the name Keshava, the killer of Keshi.
कंसाय ते शौरिसुतत्वमुक्त्वा तं तद्वधोत्कं प्रतिरुध्य वाचा।
प्राप्तेन केशिक्षपणावसाने श्रीनारदेन त्वमभिष्टुतोऽभू: ॥७॥
कंसाय ते	to Kansa Thy
शौरि-सुतत्वम्-उक्त्वा	Vasudeva"s son having said
तं तत्-	him (Kansa), his (Vasudeva's)
वध-उत्कं	killing eagerness
प्रतिरुध्य वाचा	dissuading verbally
प्राप्तेन	who had come
केशि-क्षपण-अवसाने	at the end of Keshi's destruction
श्री-नारदेन त्वम्-	by Shri Naarada, Thou
अभिष्टुत:-अभू:	were praised
Sage Naarada had told Kansa that Thou were the son of Vasudeva. Kansa eagerly set out to kill Vasudeva but was verbally dissuaded by Shri Naarada to do so. At the end of Keshi's destruction Naarada came to Thee and sung Thy praises.
कदापि गोपै: सह काननान्ते निलायनक्रीडनलोलुपं त्वाम् ।
मयात्मज: प्राप दुरन्तमायो व्योमाभिधो व्योमचरोपरोधी ॥८॥
कदापि	once
गोपै: सह	with the Gopas
काननान्ते	in the forest
निलायन-क्रीडन-लोलुपं	hide and seek game engaged in
त्वाम्	Thee
मय-आत्मज:	Maya's son
प्राप	approached
दुरन्त-माय:	(who had) immense magical powers
व्योम-अभिध:	Vyoma named
व्योम-चर-उपरोधी	the gods obstructing
One day Thou were engaged in playing the game of hide and seek with the Gopa boys. Just then the son of Maya, an Asura named Vyoma who had immense magical powers and who was an enemy of the gods, approached Thee.
स चोरपालायितवल्लवेषु चोरायितो गोपशिशून् पशूंश्च
गुहासु कृत्वा पिदधे शिलाभिस्त्वया च बुद्ध्वा परिमर्दितोऽभूत् ॥९॥
स	he (Vyoma)
चोर-पालायित-वल्लवेषु	among the thieves and the policemen boys
चोरायित:	(acting) as a thief
गोप-शिशून्	the Gopa boys
पशून्-च	and the cows
गुहासु कृत्वा	in a cave doing (putting)
पिदधे शिलाभि:-	closed (the caves) with stones
त्वया च बुद्ध्वा	and by Thee, understanding (the situation)
परिमर्दित:-अभूत्	killed was
He, in the game, mingled among the boys who were playing as thief and policemen. Vyoma playing as thief put the Gopa boys and the cows in a cave and closed the mouth of the cave with a stone. As Thou understood the situation, Vyoma was killed by Thee.
एवं विधैश्चाद्भुतकेलिभेदैरानन्दमूर्च्छामतुलां व्रजस्य ।
पदे पदे नूतनयन्नसीमां परात्मरूपिन् पवनेश पाया: ॥१०॥
एवं विधै:-च-	this and such like
अद्भुत-	strange
केलि-भेदै:-	sports of different kinds
आनन्द-मूर्च्छाम्-	in bliss swooning (happiness)
अतुलां व्रजस्य	extremely of Vraj
पदे पदे	every now and then
नूतयन्-	renewing
असीमां	unlimitedly
परमात्मरूपिन्	O Supreme Being
पवनेश	O Lord of Guruvaayur
पाया:	protect me
Thou made Vraja swoon in bliss with such strange and different kinds of sports.Thou renewed Thy sports every now and then with unlimited variety. O Supreme Being! O Lord of Guruvaayur! protect me.